Place one ice cube in a sealed, clear bag, set the bag on a plate, and start a timer.
We can watch without touching very cold water or making a slippery puddle.
At first the cube has straight edges and keeps its own shape.
Later, liquid gathers inside the bag and takes the shape of the bottom.
Something has changed, but let us be precise about what.
The cube shape is disappearing from view.
The water is not disappearing.
Our investigation will track the material called water before, during, and after this change.
Three words help us untangle the evidence: material, state, and shape.
Water is the material.
Solid and liquid are states.
Cube and puddle describe shapes.
Before melting, we have solid water in a cube shape.
After melting, we have liquid water in the shape of the bag and plate beneath it.
A learner might say, 'The ice is gone.
' In everyday talk that can mean the solid shape is gone.
In chemistry, we repair the sentence: the solid state changed, but the water material remained.
Precise words stop an ordinary change from sounding like matter was destroyed.
Let us plan a safe time-lapse rather than simply wait.
Keep the camera still, keep the sealed bag on the same plate, and take one image every two minutes.
Add a card showing the time in each frame.
Do not hold the ice against skin, taste the water, or leave melted water where someone could slip.
An adult can help position the device so it will not fall.
The changing outline becomes our evidence.
A time-lapse speeds up playback, not the melting itself.
It is a record made from separate observations, so gaps between frames are not events we directly saw.
Now compare the first, middle, and final frames.
In frame one, nearly all the water is solid.
In the middle, solid ice and liquid water are both present.
In the final frame, the visible cube may be gone, yet liquid remains inside the same sealed bag.
Some water may cling to a fold where the camera cannot show it clearly.
Still, the labelled, closed setup gives strong evidence against the claim that the water vanished.
We can describe the change without asking one photograph to tell the whole story.
Suppose a sensitive balance measures the sealed bag before and after melting.
If nothing enters, leaves, or spills, the measured mass should stay about the same.
The material has been conserved: it is still present even though its state and shape changed.
A balance has limited precision, so the last digit may differ slightly.
That tiny difference does not mean water was created or destroyed.
We look for readings that are about the same.
This balance comparison belongs in an adult-led or app demonstration, not a required home experiment.
Why does the ice melt on the plate?
The surroundings are warmer than the ice, so energy is transferred to the colder water.
We often say the ice gains heat.
Heat is energy being transferred because of a temperature difference; it is not a substance poured into the cube.
As energy arrives, melting can occur.
The room cools by an amount far too small for us to notice here.
We do not need boiling water, a heater, or a flame.
Room-temperature surroundings provide a slow,
low-risk change that is ideal for observation and gives the camera time to collect useful evidence.
This graph tells a story without advanced maths.
Time runs from left to right.
Temperature runs from lower to higher.
First, the line rises as cold ice warms.
For pure water, melting happens at about 0 degrees Celsius.
The line becomes flatter while melting takes place.
After all the ice is liquid, the line can rise again as the water warms.
Read the shape: rise, flatter section, rise.
Our graph is simplified, so real classroom points may wobble instead of making a smooth line.
We care about the pattern, not calculating a slope.
A common question is, 'If energy keeps arriving, why does the temperature stop rising for a while?
' During the flatter part, incoming energy helps change solid water into liquid water.
It is not mainly making the temperature climb.
That is why temperature can stay nearly steady while both states are present.
Once melting is complete, more energy can raise the liquid's temperature again.
This simple graph shows the main pattern, not every small change that a real thermometer may record.
We can use a particle model to explain the state change.
In the solid picture, dots are close together in an organised arrangement and vibrate around positions.
In the liquid picture, dots remain close but can move past neighbours.
We keep the same number, colour, and size of dots to represent the same material.
The model helps us think about arrangement and movement.
It is not a microscope photograph.
Real water particles are not coloured circles, the spaces are not drawn to scale,
and the model does not show every attraction or collision.
Its value is explaining evidence, not copying reality exactly.
Now run the state-change story in reverse.
Place liquid water in an ice tray and put it in a freezer.
Energy transfers from the warmer water to the colder surroundings inside the freezer.
Over time, the liquid becomes solid.
That is freezing.
The freezer does not add 'cold stuff'; it helps energy leave the water.
The material remains water throughout.
A safe investigation can mark the tray level before freezing and photograph it before and after,
with an adult handling the freezer space.
Never taste investigation samples, and never seal water in a rigid,
completely full container because expanding water can damage it.
A cooling curve tells the reverse story.
As liquid water cools, the graph slopes downward.
Pure water freezes at about 0 degrees Celsius.
During freezing, the line becomes flatter while liquid and solid are both present.
After freezing is complete, the solid can cool further and the line slopes down again.
Read it as fall, flatter section, fall.
We are not asking for negative numbers or rate calculations.
We are matching graph regions to events we can observe.
The graph is simplified, so real freezer readings may wobble instead of following straight lines.
Ice is not the only solid that can melt.
Chocolate, butter, and candle wax can also become liquids under suitable conditions,
but they do not all melt at the same temperature or in exactly the same way.
Some mixtures soften across a range before they flow.
For our child-led observation, we stay with sealed ice at room temperature.
Hot wax can burn skin and must never be heated for this activity.
Chocolate and butter can be shown in recorded adult demonstrations.
The transferable question is always: which material are we tracking, what state was it in,
and what state is it in now?
When water melts or freezes, it remains water.
No new material is needed to explain the evidence.
We call this a physical change: state and appearance change while the substance stays the same.
Not every change caused by heating is melting.
Toast browning, paper burning, and an egg cooking make different materials.
We will not investigate flames or hot cooking here.
The words 'it got warm' do not name a process.
Look for evidence that a solid became its own liquid, then ask whether freezing can reverse the state change.
Let us test three claims.
Claim one: 'The cube disappeared, so the material was destroyed.
' Reject it; liquid water remains.
Claim two: 'The flat graph means no energy enters.
' Reject it; energy supports the state change while temperature stays nearly steady.
Claim three: 'Particle dots show exactly what water looks like.
' Reject that too; dots are model symbols.
A strong explanation joins evidence and reasoning: the sealed bag still contains water,
the state changes from solid to liquid, and the simple graph becomes flatter during melting.
Several clues support one careful conclusion.
Here is the complete story.
In a safe time-lapse, solid water loses its cube shape and becomes liquid water.
In a sealed system, the material is conserved.
Energy transfers from warmer surroundings to colder ice.
A simple heating curve rises, flattens during melting, then rises again.
A cooling curve reverses the pattern during freezing.
The particle model shows close particles changing from mostly fixed positions to movement past neighbours,
but it is not a photograph.
Whenever an object seems to vanish, ask: what material am I tracking, what evidence remains,
and did its state change?